docs/ARCHITECTURE.md, before:

# JabTerm Architecture

## Overview

JabTerm is published as a single package with two subpath entry points:

- **`jabterm/server`** — Node.js WebSocket server that spawns PTY processes via `node-pty`
- **`jabterm/react`** — React component that renders xterm.js and connects to the server

## Server API

JabTerm provides two server entry points:

- **`createJabtermServer(options)`** (recommended): embeddable, test-friendly server with an explicit lifecycle.
- **`createTerminalServer(options)`** (legacy): convenience helper that immediately listens and returns `{ wss, port, close() }`.

### `createJabtermServer(options)`

`createJabtermServer()` returns an object with:

- `listen(): Promise<{ address, family, port }>` — starts listening (supports `port: 0`)
- `address(): { address, family, port }` — returns the bound address (after `listen()`)
- `close(): Promise<void>` — deterministically terminates all WebSocket clients + PTYs

Key options:

- `port`, `host` — bind address (use `port: 0` for ephemeral ports)
- `path` — WS upgrade base path; also supports per-session routing as `${path}/:terminalId`
- `onCreatePty({ terminalId, request })` — per-session PTY config hook (cwd/env/shellArgs/cols/rows)
- `authenticate(req)` — optional auth gate for upgrades
- `allowedOrigins` — optional allowlist/policy for `Origin` header
- `logger` — optional structured logger

## Data Flow — Direct Mode

In development or local HTTP setups, the browser connects directly to the terminal server:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Browser
    participant JabTermServer as JabTerm Server<br/>(http upgrade + ws + node-pty)
    participant Shell as Shell Process<br/>($SHELL / bash / zsh)

    Browser->>JabTermServer: WebSocket upgrade ws://host:3223/ws/:terminalId
    JabTermServer->>Shell: pty.spawn(resolveDefaultShell())
    Note over JabTermServer,Shell: PTY allocated (cols=80, rows=24)

    Browser->>JabTermServer: Binary frame (keystrokes)
    JabTermServer->>Shell: ptyProcess.write(data)
    Shell->>JabTermServer: ptyProcess.onData(output)
    JabTermServer->>Browser: Text frame (terminal output)

    Browser->>JabTermServer: JSON text frame {"type":"resize","cols":120,"rows":30}
    JabTermServer->>Shell: ptyProcess.resize(120, 30)

    Browser->>JabTermServer: WebSocket close
    JabTermServer->>Shell: ptyProcess.kill()
    Note over Shell: Process terminated cleanly
```

## Data Flow — Proxy Mode

For HTTPS, Cloudflare Tunnels, or reverse-proxy setups, the browser connects to the
app server on the same origin, which bridges to the local terminal server:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Browser
    participant AppServer as App Server<br/>(your HTTP server)
    participant Proxy as createTerminalProxy<br/>(WebSocketServer)
    participant JabTermServer as JabTerm Server<br/>(node-pty + ws)

    Browser->>AppServer: Upgrade wss://host/ws/terminal
    AppServer->>Proxy: handleUpgrade(req, socket, head)
    Proxy->>JabTermServer: WebSocket connect ws://127.0.0.1:3223
    Note over Proxy,JabTermServer: Bridge established

    Browser->>Proxy: Binary frame
    Proxy->>JabTermServer: Forward frame
    JabTermServer->>Proxy: Terminal output
    Proxy->>Browser: Forward frame

    Browser->>Proxy: Close
    Proxy->>JabTermServer: Close
```

## Protocol

JabTerm uses a simple multiplexed protocol over a single WebSocket connection:

### Frame Types

| Direction | Frame Type | Content | Purpose |
|-----------|-----------|---------|---------|
| Client -> Server | Binary | Raw bytes | Terminal input (keystrokes) |
| Client -> Server | Text (JSON) | `{"type":"resize","cols":N,"rows":N}` | Resize PTY |
| Server -> Client | Text | Raw terminal output | Display in xterm.js |

### Control Message Detection

The server uses a heuristic: if a text frame starts with `{`, it attempts to parse it as JSON.
If parsing succeeds and `type === "resize"`, it is treated as a control message.
Otherwise, the frame is written to the PTY as input.

### Resize Safety

Minimum dimensions are enforced (`cols >= 10`, `rows >= 10`) to prevent shell crashes from
zero-dimension resize calls.

## Component Lifecycle

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Mount["Component mounts"] --> CreateTerm["Create Terminal instance"]
    CreateTerm --> LoadFit["Load FitAddon"]
    LoadFit --> OpenTerm["term.open(container)"]
    OpenTerm --> FitSize["fitAddon.fit()"]
    FitSize --> ConnectWS["new WebSocket(wsUrl)"]
    ConnectWS --> WsOpen["ws.onopen"]
    WsOpen --> SendResize["Send resize JSON"]
    WsOpen --> Ready["Terminal ready"]

    Ready --> OnData["term.onData -> ws.send(binary)"]
    Ready --> OnMessage["ws.onmessage -> term.write()"]
    Ready --> WindowResize["window.resize -> fitAddon.fit() + send resize"]

    Unmount["Component unmounts"] --> DetachHandlers["Detach WS handlers"]
    DetachHandlers --> CloseWS["ws.close(1000)"]
    CloseWS --> DisposeTerm["term.dispose()"]
```

## Graceful Shutdown

The server tracks all spawned PTY processes and WebSocket sessions.

On `close()`:
1. WebSocket clients are closed/terminated
2. All tracked PTY processes are killed
3. Both the WebSocket server and the underlying HTTP server are closed (with a bounded timeout)

This prevents zombie shell processes when the server is stopped (e.g., during CI teardown
or when Playwright finishes tests).

## Proxy Bridge Details

`createTerminalProxy()` returns a `WebSocketServer` in `noServer` mode. The caller is
responsible for routing HTTP upgrade requests to it.

The bridge:
- Buffers up to 100 frames while the upstream connection is still `CONNECTING`
- Replays buffered frames once upstream reaches `OPEN`
- Mirrors `close` and `error` events in both directions
- Normalizes WebSocket close codes (strips reserved codes like 1005, 1006, 1015)
- Truncates close reasons to 123 bytes (WebSocket spec limit)

Commit message:

protocol/react: hello handshake, error frames, and output read APIs
Co-authored-by: Alexander Nazarov <holiber@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/ARCHITECTURE.md, after:

# JabTerm Architecture

## Overview

JabTerm is published as a single package with two subpath entry points:

- **`jabterm/server`** — Node.js WebSocket server that spawns PTY processes via `node-pty`
- **`jabterm/react`** — React component that renders xterm.js and connects to the server

## Server API

JabTerm provides two server entry points:

- **`createJabtermServer(options)`** (recommended): embeddable, test-friendly server with an explicit lifecycle.
- **`createTerminalServer(options)`** (legacy): convenience helper that immediately listens and returns `{ wss, port, close() }`.

### `createJabtermServer(options)`

`createJabtermServer()` returns an object with:

- `listen(): Promise<{ address, family, port }>` — starts listening (supports `port: 0`)
- `address(): { address, family, port }` — returns the bound address (after `listen()`)
- `close(): Promise<void>` — deterministically terminates all WebSocket clients + PTYs

Key options:

- `port`, `host` — bind address (use `port: 0` for ephemeral ports)
- `path` — WS upgrade base path; also supports per-session routing as `${path}/:terminalId`
- `onCreatePty({ terminalId, request })` — per-session PTY config hook (cwd/env/shellArgs/cols/rows)
- `authenticate(req)` — optional auth gate for upgrades
- `allowedOrigins` — optional allowlist/policy for `Origin` header
- `logger` — optional structured logger

## Data Flow — Direct Mode

In development or local HTTP setups, the browser connects directly to the terminal server:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Browser
    participant JabTermServer as JabTerm Server<br/>(http upgrade + ws + node-pty)
    participant Shell as Shell Process<br/>($SHELL / bash / zsh)

    Browser->>JabTermServer: WebSocket upgrade ws://host:3223/ws/:terminalId
    JabTermServer->>Shell: pty.spawn(resolveDefaultShell())
    Note over JabTermServer,Shell: PTY allocated (cols=80, rows=24)

    Browser->>JabTermServer: Binary frame (keystrokes)
    JabTermServer->>Shell: ptyProcess.write(data)
    Shell->>JabTermServer: ptyProcess.onData(output)
    JabTermServer->>Browser: Text frame (terminal output)

    Browser->>JabTermServer: JSON text frame {"type":"resize","cols":120,"rows":30}
    JabTermServer->>Shell: ptyProcess.resize(120, 30)

    Browser->>JabTermServer: WebSocket close
    JabTermServer->>Shell: ptyProcess.kill()
    Note over Shell: Process terminated cleanly
```

## Data Flow — Proxy Mode

For HTTPS, Cloudflare Tunnels, or reverse-proxy setups, the browser connects to the
app server on the same origin, which bridges to the local terminal server:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Browser
    participant AppServer as App Server<br/>(your HTTP server)
    participant Proxy as createTerminalProxy<br/>(WebSocketServer)
    participant JabTermServer as JabTerm Server<br/>(node-pty + ws)

    Browser->>AppServer: Upgrade wss://host/ws/terminal
    AppServer->>Proxy: handleUpgrade(req, socket, head)
    Proxy->>JabTermServer: WebSocket connect ws://127.0.0.1:3223
    Note over Proxy,JabTermServer: Bridge established

    Browser->>Proxy: Binary frame
    Proxy->>JabTermServer: Forward frame
    JabTermServer->>Proxy: Terminal output
    Proxy->>Browser: Forward frame

    Browser->>Proxy: Close
    Proxy->>JabTermServer: Close
```

## Protocol

JabTerm uses a simple multiplexed protocol over a single WebSocket connection:

### Frame Types

| Direction | Frame Type | Content | Purpose |
|-----------|-----------|---------|---------|
| Client -> Server | Binary | Raw bytes | Terminal input (keystrokes) |
| Client -> Server | Text (JSON) | `{"type":"hello","version":1}` | Optional protocol negotiation / mismatch detection |
| Client -> Server | Text (JSON) | `{"type":"resize","cols":N,"rows":N}` | Resize PTY |
| Server -> Client | Text | Raw terminal output | Display in xterm.js |
| Server -> Client | Text (JSON) | `{"type":"error","message":"..."}` | Structured error reporting for UI/tests |

### Control Message Detection

The server uses a heuristic: if a text frame starts with `{`, it attempts to parse it as JSON.
If parsing succeeds and `type` is a known control message (e.g. `hello`, `resize`), it is treated as a control message.
Otherwise, the frame is written to the PTY as input.

### Resize Safety

Minimum dimensions are enforced (`cols >= 10`, `rows >= 10`) to prevent shell crashes from
zero-dimension resize calls.

## Component Lifecycle

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Mount["Component mounts"] --> CreateTerm["Create Terminal instance"]
    CreateTerm --> LoadFit["Load FitAddon"]
    LoadFit --> OpenTerm["term.open(container)"]
    OpenTerm --> FitSize["fitAddon.fit()"]
    FitSize --> ConnectWS["new WebSocket(wsUrl)"]
    ConnectWS --> WsOpen["ws.onopen"]
    WsOpen --> SendResize["Send resize JSON"]
    WsOpen --> Ready["Terminal ready"]

    Ready --> OnData["term.onData -> ws.send(binary)"]
    Ready --> OnMessage["ws.onmessage -> term.write()"]
    Ready --> WindowResize["window.resize -> fitAddon.fit() + send resize"]

    Unmount["Component unmounts"] --> DetachHandlers["Detach WS handlers"]
    DetachHandlers --> CloseWS["ws.close(1000)"]
    CloseWS --> DisposeTerm["term.dispose()"]
```

## Graceful Shutdown

The server tracks all spawned PTY processes and WebSocket sessions.

On `close()`:
1. WebSocket clients are closed/terminated
2. All tracked PTY processes are killed
3. Both the WebSocket server and the underlying HTTP server are closed (with a bounded timeout)

This prevents zombie shell processes when the server is stopped (e.g., during CI teardown
or when Playwright finishes tests).

## Proxy Bridge Details

`createTerminalProxy()` returns a `WebSocketServer` in `noServer` mode. The caller is
responsible for routing HTTP upgrade requests to it.

The bridge:
- Buffers up to 100 frames while the upstream connection is still `CONNECTING`
- Replays buffered frames once upstream reaches `OPEN`
- Mirrors `close` and `error` events in both directions
- Normalizes WebSocket close codes (strips reserved codes like 1005, 1006, 1015)
- Truncates close reasons to 123 bytes (WebSocket spec limit)
